# HNSC Biomarkers
[The Cancer Geonome Atlas](https://cancergenome.nih.gov) (TCGA) "a landmark cancer genomics program, molecularly characterized over 20,000 primary cancer and matched normal samples spanning 33 cancer types. This joint effort between the National Cancer Institute and the National Human Genome Research Institute began in 2006, bringing together researchers from diverse disciplines and multiple institutions.

Over the next dozen years, TCGA generated over 2.5 petabytes of genomic, epigenomic, transcriptomic, and proteomic data. The data, which has already lead to improvements in our ability to diagnose, treat, and prevent cancer, will remain publicly available for anyone in the research community to use."

This analysis, written in R, looks at microRNA (miRNA) sequences and clinical data for Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcoma (HNSC) from TCGA attempting to identify statistically significant biomarkers indicating lymphovascular invasion (LVI) presence to group patients in high and low risk classes and predicting survival. With [A novel microRNA signature predicts survival in liver hepatocellular carcinoma after hepatectomy](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-26374-9) as inspiration, this analysis was completed as a capstone project for STAT 685 under the supervision of [Dr. Moumita Karmakar](https://stat.tamu.edu/people/#all-k) for a MS in Applied Statistics at Texas A&M University in Fall 2020. 

## Materials and Methods
### TCGA dataset
A total of 2246 miRNA expression profiles in HNSC patients along with their corresponding clinical and survival data were downloaded from the GDC TCGA data portal using [UCSC's Xena Browser](https://xenabrowser.net/datapages/?cohort=GDC%20TCGA%20Head%20and%20Neck%20Cancer%20(HNSC)&removeHub=https%3A%2F%2Fxena.treehouse.gi.ucsc.edu%3A443) data hub (September 2020). Patients without lymphovascular invasion present data and follow-up less than 30 days were removed. Additionally, miRNA expression profiles with more then 30% missing values were also excluded from the analysis resulting in 233 patient observations with 646 miRNA expression profiles. Missing miRNA expression profiles were subsequently imputed using the [missForest](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/missForest/missForest.pdf) package which is a nonparametric missing value imputation using random forest.

### Identification of dysregulated miRNAs in HNSC
The raw counts of miRNA expression data of 43 HNSC patients with their paired normal tissues were obtained from the TCGA dataset using the [TCGA2STAT](http://www.liuzlab.org/TCGA2STAT/) library. The miRNAs with missing values were imputed using the same missForest package mentioned previously aand were then normaalized using log2(x+1). miRNA expressions shared between the TCGA dataset and the match paired datasets were subsequently evaluated using univariate logistic regression and those with p-values < 0.05 were considered to be differentiaally expressed miRNA aand included for subsequent analysis. The resulting 28 significant miRNAs consisted of 7 down regulated miRNA expresions and 21 up regulated.

### Identification of miRNAs with prognostic score in HNSC
To identify common miRNAs related to LVI within each of the subgroups stratified by the clinical stage, a semi-supervised method and univariate Cox regression analysis were used, and HR > 1 or HR < 1 with P < 0.05 was used as the cutoff11,15. The patient subclasses in each group of clinical characteristics represented non-overlapping sets.

### Definition of prognostic risk model and ROC curve analysis
The TCGA data were randomly divided into a training and testing set. A semi-supervised principal components (SPC) method was used to select significant miRNAs and develop the linear miRNA signature prognostic model11. The prognostic score was calculated as follows: Prognostic score = (2.307831 × hsa-mir-187) + (hsa-mir-9-3 × 2.553812) + (hsa-mir-490 × 2.726262) + (hsa-mir-1258 × 2.217082) − (hsa-mir-3144 × 2.660158) + (hsa-mir-551a × 3.428998) + (hsa-mir-665 × 2.855964). The prognostic scores were then computed for all 318 patients. The optimal cutoff point of the prognostic score was obtained in ROC curve analysis for predicting the 5-year survival of the training set. Kaplan-Meier and log-rank methods were used for evaluating OS16. Time-dependent ROC curves were used to evaluate the predicted power of the miRNA-based signature model.

## Results



## Acknowledgements
The results shown here are in whole or part based upon data generated by the TCGA Research Network: https://www.cancer.gov/tcga.

## Citations
Fu, Q., Yang, F., Xiang, T. et al. A novel microRNA signature predicts survival in liver hepatocellular carcinoma after hepatectomy. Sci Rep 8, 7933 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-26374-9

Goldman, M.J., Craft, B., Hastie, M. et al. Visualizing and interpreting cancer genomics data via the Xena platform. Nat Biotechnol (2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-020-0546-8
